Volume 9 Number 4  November 2014
www.ieee-cis.org

Features
18
An Adaptive Variable Neighborhood Search

for a Heterogeneous Fleet Vehicle Routing Problem with
Three-Dimensional Loading Constraints

by Lijun Wei, Zhenzhen Zhang, and Andrew Lim
31
A Metaheuristic-Based Approach for the Capacitated Supply Chain

Network Design Problem Including Imperfect Quality and Rework

by Krystel K. Castillo-Villar and Jose F. Herbert-Acero
46
A Hybrid Metaheuristic Optimization Algorithm for Strategic

Planning of 4D Aircraft Trajectories at the Continental Scale

by Supatcha Chaimatanan, Daniel Delahaye, and Marcel Mongeau

Column
62 Discussion Forum

Big Data Opportunities and Challenges: Discussions from

Data Analytics Perspectives

on the cover


by Zhi-Hua Zhou, Nitesh V. Chawla,Yaochu Jin, and Graham J. Williams

IMAGE LICENSED BY INGRAM PUBLISHING

Departments
2
4

Editor's Remarks
President's Message

by Xin Yao
6 Publication Spotlight

by Derong Liu, Chin-Teng Lin,
Garry Greenwood, Simon Lucas,
and Zhengyou Zhang
10 Conference Reports
IEEE CIBCB 2014--
Computational Intelligence in
Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology
by Steven Corns

A Report on the IEEE World
Congress on Computational
Intelligence 2014 (IEEE
WCCI 2014)
by Derong Liu and Jennie Si
16 Guest Editorial
Computational Intelligence in

Production and Logistics Systems:
Solving Vehicle Routing, Supply
Chain Network, and Air-Traffic
Trajectory Planning Problems
by Bulent Catay, Raymond Chiong
Oscar Cordon, and Patrick Siarry
76 Conference Calendar

by Bernadette Bouchon-Meunier

IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine (ISSN 1556-603X) is published quarterly by The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. Headquarters: 3 Park Avenue, 17th Floor, New York, NY 10016-5997, U.S.A. +1 212 419 7900. Responsibility for the contents rests upon the authors and not upon the
IEEE, the Society, or its members. The magazine is a membership benefit of the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society, and subscriptions are included in Society
fee. Replacement copies for members are available for US$20 (one copy only). Nonmembers can purchase individual copies for US$175.00. Nonmember subscription prices are available on request. Copyright and Reprint Permissions: Abstracting is permitted with credit to the source. Libraries are permitted to photocopy
beyond the limits of the U.S. Copyright law for private use of patrons: 1) those post-1977 articles that carry a code at the bottom of the first page, provided the percopy fee indicated in the code is paid through the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01970, U.S.A.; and 2) pre-1978 articles without
fee. For other copying, reprint, or republication permission, write to: Copyrights and Permissions Department, IEEE Service Center, 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway NJ
08854 U.S.A. Copyright (c) 2014 by The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. All rights reserved. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY and at
additional mailing offices. Postmaster: Send address changes to IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, IEEE, 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854-1331
U.S.A. Printed in U.S.A. Canadian GST #125634188.

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MCI.2014.2350892

November 2014 | IEEE Computational intelligence magazine

1

Discussion
Society
Forum

Zhi-Hua Zhou, National Key Laboratory for Novel Software
Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Nitesh V. Chawla, Department of Computer Science and
Engineering and the Interdisciplinary Center for Network
Science, University of Notre Dame, USA
Yaochu Jin, Department of Computing, University of Surrey,
Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH, UK
Graham J. Williams, Chief Data Scientist with Togaware Pty
Ltd and with the Australian Tax Office, Camberra, Australia

Big Data Opportunities and Challenges:
Discussions from Data Analytics Perspectives

Abstract

B

"

ig Data" as a ter m has been
among the biggest trends of the
last three years, leading to an
upsurge of research, as well as industry
and government applications. Data is
deemed a powerful raw material that
can impact multidisciplinary research
endeavors as well as government and
business performance. The goal of this
discussion paper is to share the data
analytics opinions and perspectives of
the authors relating to the new opportunities and challenges brought forth
by the big data movement. The authors
bring together diverse perspectives,
coming from different geographical
locations with different core research
expertise and different affiliations and
work experiences. The aim of this
paper is to evoke discussion rather than
to provide a comprehensive survey of
big data research.

1. Introduction

Big data is one of the "hottest" phrases
being used today. Everyone is talking
about big data, and it is believed that
science, business, industry, government,
society, etc. will undergo a thorough
change with the influence of big data.
Technically speaking, the process of
handling big data encompasses collecDigital Object Identifier 10.1109/MCI.2014.2350953
Date of publication: 13 October 2014

62

the learning algorithm. Variety is the
tion, storage, transportation and exploimost compelling of all V's as it is presenttation. It is no doubt that the collection,
ing data of different types and modalities
storage and transportation stages are
for a given object in consideration.
necessary precursors for the ultimate
Each of the V's is certainly not
goal of exploitation through data
new. Machine learning and
analytics, which is the core of
data mining researchers have
big data processing.
been tackling these issues
Turning to a data anafor decades. However, the
lytics perspective, we note
emergence of Internetthat "big data" has come
based companies has
to be defined by the
challenged many of the
four V's--Volume,Veloctraditional process-oriity, Veracity, and Variety.
ented companies--they
It is assumed that either
now need to become
all or any one of them
knowledge-based comneeds to be met for the
panies dr iven by data
classification of a problem
rather than by process.
as a Big Data problem. VolThe goal of this article is to
ume indicates the size of the
(c) Imagestate
share the authors' opinions about
data, which might be too big to be
big data from their data analytics perhandled by the current state of algospectives. The four authors bring quite
rithms and/or systems. Velocity implies
different perspectives with different
data are streaming at rates faster than
research experiences and expertise,
that can be handled by traditional algospanning computational intelligence,
rithms and systems. Sensors are rapidly
machine learning, data mining and scireading and communicating streams of
ence, and interdisciplinary research.
data. We are approaching the world of
Authors represent academia and indusquantified self, which is presenting data
try across four different continents. This
that was not available hitherto. Veracity
diversity brings together an interesting
suggests that despite the data being
perspective and coverage on exploring
available, the quality of data is still a
data analytics in the context of today's
major concern. That is, we cannot
big data.
assume that with big data comes higher
It is worth emphasizing that this artiquality. In fact, with size comes quality
cle does not intend to provide a compreissues, which needs to be either tackled
hensive review about the state-of-the-art
at the data pre-processing stage or by

IEEE Computational intelligence magazine | November 2014

1556-603x/14(c)2014ieee

2. Machine Learning with Big Data

Machine learning is among the core
techniques for data analytics. In this
section we will first clarify three common but unfortunately misleading
arguments about learning systems in
the big data era. Then we will discuss
some issues that demand attention.
2.1. Three Misconceptions

2.1.1. "Models Are Not
Important Any More"
Many people today talk about the
replacement of sophisticated models by
big data, where we have massive
amounts of data available. The argument
goes that in the "small data era" models
were important but in the "big data era"
this might not be the case.
Such arguments are claimed to be
based on empirical observations of the
type illustrated in Fig. 1. With small data
(e.g., data size of 10), the best model is
about x% better than the worst model
in the figure, whereas the performance
improvement brought by big data (e.g.,
data size of 10 4) is y% & x%. Such

observations can be traced over many
years, as in [7], and predate the use of
"big data." It is interesting to see that in
the "big data era", many people take
such a figure (or similar figures) to claim
that having big data is enough to get
better performance. Such a superficial
observation, however, neglects the fact
that even with big data (e.g., data size of
104 in the figure), there are still significant differences between the different
models--models are still important.
Also, we often hear such arguments:
As the figure shows, the simplest model
with small data achieves the best performance with big data, and thus, one
does not need to have a sophisticated
model because the simple model is
enough. Unfortunately, this argument is
also incorrect.
First, there is no reason to conclude
that the worst-performing model on the
small data is really the "simplest", and
vice versa. Second, even if we assumed
that the worst-performing model on the
small data is really the simplest one,
there is no support for the generalization of the argument that the simplest
model will definitely achieve the best
performance with big data in tasks other
than the current empirical study.
If we take a look into [7] we can find
that Algo_1 in Fig. 1 corresponds to a
memory-based method, Algo_2 corresponds to Perceptron or Naive Bayes,
and Algo_3 corresponds to Winnow. It is
hard to conclude that Winnow is simpler than the memory-based method; at
least, the "simpler will be better" argument cannot explain why the performance of a Perceptron is better than that
of the memory-based method on big
data. A more reasonable explanation as
to why the memory-based method is
better on small data than Winnow but
worse on big data may owe to its
requirement of loading the data into
memory. This is a memory issue and not
whether a model is sophisticated or not.
The recent interest in deep learning
[10], [26] provides strong evidence that
on big data, sophisticated models are
able to achieve much better performance than simple models. We want to
emphasize that the deep learning tech-

Predictive Accuracy (%)

of big data research, nor to provide a
future big data research agenda. The aim
is to expose the authors' personal opinions and present their perspectives of the
future based on their views. As such
there will be necessarily limited evidential argument or literary support, given
the rapidly changing landscape and significant lag of academic research reporting. Indeed, many important issues and
relevant techniques are not specifically
covered in this article, and are best left to
survey papers.
While all authors have contributed
to the overall paper, each author has
focused on their particular specialities in
the following discussions. Zhou covers
machine learning, while Chawla brings
a data mining and data science perspective. Jin provides a view from computational intelligence and meta-heuristic
global optimization, and Williams draws
upon a machine learning and data mining background applied as a practicing
data scientist and consultant to industry
internationally.

100
95
90
85
80

Algo_1
Algo_2
Algo_3

75
70
10

102
103
Data Size

104

Figure 1 Illustration: Model performance
vs. data size.

niques are not really new, and many
ideas can be found from the 1990's
[25], [32]. However, there were two
serious problems that encumbered
development at that time. First, the
computational facilities available at that
time could hardly handle models with
thousands of parameters to tune. Current deep learning models involve millions or even billions of parameters.
Second, the data scale at that time was
relatively small, and thus models with
high complexity were very likely to
overfit. We can see that with the rapid
increase of computational power, training sophisticated models becomes more
and more feasible, whereas the big data
size greatly reduces the overfitting risk
of sophisticated models. From this
sense, one can even conclude that in
the big data era, sophisticated models
become more favored since simple
models are usually incapable of fully
exploiting the data.
2.1.2. "Correlation Is Enough"
Some popular books on big data,
including [37], claim that it is enough
to discover "correlation" from big data.
The importance of "causality" will be
over taken by "correlation", with some
advocating that we are entering an "era
of correlation".
Trying to discover causality represents a great intention of searching for
an in-depth understanding of the data.
This is usually challenging in many real
domains [44]. However, we have to
emphasize that correlation is far from
sufficient, and the role of causality can

November 2014 | IEEE Computational intelligence magazine

63

never be replaced by correlation. The
reason lies in the fact that one invests in
data analytics because one wants to get
information helpful for making wiser
decisions and/or taking suitable actions,
whereas the abuse of correlation will be
misleading or even disastrous.
We can easily find many examples,
even in classic statistical textbooks, illustrating that correlation cannot replace
the role of causality. For example, empirical data analysis on public security
cases in a number of cities disclosed that
the number of hospitals and the number of car thefts are highly positively
correlated. Indeed, car thefts increase almost linearly with the construction of
new hospitals. With such a correlation
identified, how would the mayor react
to reduce car thefts? An "obvious" solution is to cease the construction of new
hospitals. Unfortunately, this is an abuse
of the correlation information. It will
only decrease the opportunity of patients getting timely medical attention,
whereas it is extremely unlikely to have
anything to do with the incidence of
car thefts. Instead, the increase of both
the incidence of car thefts and the
number of hospitals is actually affected
by a latent variable, i.e., the residential
population. If one believes that correlation is sufficient and never goes deeper
into analysis of the data, one might
serve as a mayor who plans to reduce
car thefts by restricting the construction
of hospitals.
Sometimes computational challenges may encumber the discovery of
causality, and in such cases, discovering
valid correlation, will be able to provide some helpful information. However, exaggerating the importance of
"correlation" and taking the replacement of causality by correlation as a
feature of the "big data era" can be detrimental, and lead to unnecessary, negative consequences.
2.1.3. "Previous Methodologies Do
Not Work Any More"
Another popular argument claims that
previous research methodologies were
designed for small data and they cannot work well on big data. This argu-

64

ment is often held by people who are
highly enthusiastic for newly proposed
techniques, thus they seek "totally
new" paradigms.
We appreciate the search for new
paradigms as this is one of the driving
forces for innovative research. However,
we highlight the importance of "past"
methodologies.
Firstly, we should emphasize that
researchers have always been trying to
work with "big" data, such that what is
regarded as big data today might not be
regarded as big data in the future (e.g.,
in ten years). For example, in a famous
article [31], the author expressed that
"For learning tasks with 10,000 training
examples and more it becomes impossible
...". The title of the paper "Making
Large-Scale SVM Training Practical"
implies that the goal of the article was
"large-scale"--the experimental datasets
in the paper mostly contained thousands
of samples, and the biggest one contained 49,749 samples. This was deemed
as "amazingly big data" at that time.
Nowadays, few people will regard fifty
thousand samples as big data.
Secondly, many past research methodologies still hold much value. We
might consider [60], the proceedings of
a KDD 1999 workshop. On the second
page it is emphasized that "implementation ... in high-performance parallel and distributed computing ... is becoming crucial for
ensuring system scalability and interactivity
as data continues to grow inexorably in size
and complexity". Indeed, most of the
"current" facilitation for handling big
data, such as high-performance computing, parallel and distributed computing,
high efficiency storage, etc., has been
used in data analytics for many years and
will remain popular into the future.
2.2. Opportunities and Challenges

It is difficult to identify "totally new"
issues brought about by big data. Nonetheless, there are always important
aspects to which one hopes to see greater attention and efforts channeled.
First, although we have always been
trying to handle (increasingly) big data,
we have usually assumed that the core
computation can be held in memory

IEEE Computational intelligence magazine | November 2014

seamlessly. Whereas the current data size
reaches to such a scale that the data
becomes hard to store and even hard for
multiple scans. However, many important learning objectives or performance
measures are non-linear, non-smooth,
non-convex and non-decomposable
over samples. For example, AUC (Area
Under the ROC Curve) [24], and their
optimizations, inherently require
repeated scans of the entire dataset. Is it
learnable by scanning the data only
once, and if it needs to store something,
the storage requirement is small and
independent to data size? We call this
"one-pass learning" and it is important
because in many big data applications,
the data is not only big but also accumulated over time, hence it is impossible
to know the eventual size of the dataset.
Fortunately, there are some recent efforts
towards this direction, including [22].
On the other hand, although we have
big data, are all the data crucial? The
answer is very likely that they are not.
Then, the question becomes can we
identify valuable data subsets from the
original big dataset?
Second, a benefit of big data to
machine learning lies in the fact that
with more and more samples available
for learning, the risk of overfitting
becomes smaller. We all understand that
controlling overfitting is one of the
central concerns in the design of
machine learning algorithms as well as
in the application of machine learning
techniques in practice. The concern
with overfitting led to a natural favor
for simple models with less parameters
to tune. However, the parameter tuning
constraints may change with big data.
We can now try to train a model with
billions of parameters, because we have
sufficiently big data, facilitated by powerful computational facilities that enable
the training of such models. The great
success of deep learning [10] during the
past few years serves as a good showcase. However, most deep learning work
strongly relies on engineering tricks
that are difficult to be repeated and
studied by others, apart from the
authors themselves. It is important to
study the myster ies behind deep

learning; for example, why and when
some ingredients of current deep learning techniques, e.g., pretraining and
dropout, are helpful and how they can
be more helpful? There have been some
recent efforts in this direction [6], [23],
[52]. Moreover, we might ask if it is
possible to develop a parameter tuning
guide to replace the current almostexhaustive search?
Third, we need to note that big data
usually contains too many "interests",
and from such data we may be able to
get "anything we want"; in other words,
we can find supporting evidence for
any argument we are in favor of. Thus,
how do we judge/evaluate the "findings"? One important solution is to
turn to statistical hypothesis testing. The
use of statistical tests can help at least in
two aspects: First, we need to verify that
what we have done is really what we
wanted to do. Second, we need to verify that what we have attained is not
caused by small perturbations that exist
in the data, particularly due to the nonthorough exploitation of the whole
data. Although statistical tests have been
studied for centuries and have been
used in machine learning for decades,
the design and deployment of adequate
statistical tests is non-trivial, and in fact
there have been misuses of statistical
tests [17]. Moreover, statistical tests suitable for big data analysis, not only for
the computational efficiency but also
for the concern of using only part of
the data, remain an interesting but
under-explored area of research.
Another way to check the validity of
the analysis results is to derive interpretable models. Although many machine
learning models are black-boxes, there
have been studies on improving the
comprehensibility of models such as
rule extraction [62]. Visualization is
another important approach, although it
is often difficult with dimensions higher
than three.
Moreover, big data usually exists in a
distributed manner; that is, different
parts of the data may be held by different owners, and no one holds the entire
data. It is often the case that some
sources are crucial for some analytics

goal, whereas some other sources pose
less importance. Given the fact that different data owners might warrant the
analyzer with different access rights, can
we leverage the sources without access
to the whole data? What information
must we have for this purpose? Even if
the owners agree to provide some data,
it might be too challenging to transport
the data due to its enormous size. Thus,
can we exploit the data without transporting them? Moreover, data at different places may have different label quality, and may have significant label noise,
perhaps due to crowdsourcing. Can we
do learning with low quality and/or
even contradictory label information?
Furthermore, usually we assume that the
data is identically and independently distributed; however, the fundamental i.i.d.
assumption can hardly hold across different data sources. Can we learn effectively and efficiently beyond the i.i.d.
assumption? There are a few preliminary
studies on these important issues for big
data, including [34], [38], [61].
In addition, given the same data, different users might have different
demands. For example, for product recommendation, some users might
demand that highly recommended items
are good, and some users might demand
that all the recommended items are
good, while other users might demand
all the good items have been returned.
The computational, and storage loads of
big data may be inhibitors to the construction of a model for each of the various demands separately. Can we build
one model (a "general model" which
can be adapted to other demands with
cheap minor modifications) to satisfy the
various demands? Some efforts have
been reported recently in [35].
Another long-standing but unresolved issue is, in the "big data era", can
we really avoid the violation of privacy
concerns [2]? This is actually a longstanding problem that still remains open.
3. Data Mining/Science
with Big Data

Aspects of big data have been studied
and considered by a number of data
mining researchers over the past decade

and beyond. Mining massive data by
scalable algorithms leveraging parallel
and distributed architectures has been a
focus topic of numerous workshops and
conferences, including [1], [14], [43],
[50], [60]. However, the embrace of the
Volume aspect of data is coming to a
realization now, largely through the
rapid availability of datasets that exceed
terabytes and now petabytes--whether
through scientific simulations and
experiments, business transactional data
or digital footprints of individuals.
Astronomy, for example, is a fantastic
application of big data driven by the
advances in the astronomical instruments. Each pixel captured by the new
instruments can have a few thousand
attributes and translate quickly to a petascale problem. This rapid growth in
data is creating a new field called Astroinformatics, which is forging partnerships between computer scientists,
statisticians and astronomers. The emergence of big data from various domains,
whether in business or science or
humanities or engineering, is presenting
novel challenges in scale and provenance
of data, requiring a new rigor and interest among the data mining community
to translate their algorithms and frameworks for data-driven discoveries.
A similar caveat also plays with the
concept of Veracity of data. The issue of
data quality or veracity has been considered by a number of researchers [39],
including data complexity [9], missing
values [19], noise [58], imbalance [13],
and dataset shift [39]. The latter, dataset
shift, is most profound in the case of big
data as the unseen data may present a
distribution that is not seen in the training data. This problem is tied with the
problem of Velocity, which presents the
challenge of developing streaming algorithms that are able to cope with shocks
in the distributions of the data. Again,
this is an established area of research in
the data mining community in the
form of learning from streaming data
[3], [48]. The key opportunity here is to
take the academic literature for a testdrive in real industry settings where
issues of scale and delivery often supersede the desire for accuracy. Depending

November 2014 | IEEE Computational intelligence magazine

65

on the application domain, a simpler
model might be preferred, even if
slightly less accurate. However, as demonstrated by the success of deep learning, computational advances are opening new doors to new opportunities.
The issue with Variety is, undoubtedly, unique and interesting. A rapid
influx of unstructured and multimodal
data, such as social media, images,
audio, video, in addition to the structured data, is providing novel opportunities for data mining researchers. We
are seeing such data rapidly being collected into organizational data hubs,
where the unstructured and structured
cohabit and provide the source for all
data mining. A fundamental question is
related to integrating these varied
streams or inputs of data into a singular
feature vector presentation for the traditional learning algorithms.
An example of big data that has the
elements of the four V's is the social
media and network data. The last
decade has witnessed the boom of
social media/network websites, such as
Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter.
Together they facilitate an increasingly
wide range of human interactions that
also provide the modicums of big data.
The ubiquity of social networks manifests as complex relationships among
individuals. It is generally believed that
the research in this field will enhance
our understandings of the topology of
social networks and the patterns of
human interactions [8], [18], [33], [36],
[41], [54]. However, such data present
numerous challenges from provenance
(individual created data), veracity of data
as the data is effectively crowd-sourced,
volume as millions of individual are
contributing content or making connections, and variety as the data not
only comprises of the social network
structure but also content such as text
and images.
Our call to the community is to
reconvene some of the traditional
methods and identify their performance
benchmarks on "big data", and identify
novel directions for ground-breaking
research built on the foundations we
have already developed.

66

3.1. From Data to Knowledge
to Discovery to Action

Recent times have greatly increased our
ability to gather massive amounts of
data, presenting us with an opportunity
to induce transformative changes in the
way we analyze and understand data.
These data exhibit a number of traits
that have the potential to not only
complement hypothesis-driven research
but also to enable the discovery of new
hypotheses or phenomena from the
rich data, which could include spatial
data, temporal data, observational data,
diverse data sources, text data, unstructured data, etc.
Data of such extent and longitudinal
character brings novel challenges for
data-driven science for charting the path
from data to knowledge to insight. This
process of data-guided knowledge discovery will entail an integrated plan of
descriptive analysis and predictive modeling for useful insights or hypotheses.
These hypotheses are not just correlational but help explain an underlying
phenomenon or help validate an
observed phenomenon.
These discovered hypotheses or predictive analytics can help inform decisions, which include certain actions that
can be appropriately weighed by the
cost and impact of the action. The set of
alternating hypotheses leads to scenarios
that can be weighted situationally. Brynjolfsson et al. [11] studied 179 large
companies and found that the companies that embraced data-driven decision
making experienced a 5 to 6 percent
higher level of productivity. The key difference was that these companies relied
on data and analytics rather than solely
on experience and intuition.
Healthcare is another area witnessing
a significant application of big data.
United Healthcare, for example, is
expending effort on mining customer
attitudes as gleaned from recorded voice
files. The company is leveraging natural
language processing along with text data
to identify the customer sentiment and
satisfaction. It is a clear example of taking disparate big data, developing analytical models, and discovering quantifiable
and actionable insights.

IEEE Computational intelligence magazine | November 2014

Big data presents unparalleled opportunities: to accelerate scientific discovery
and innovation; to improve health and
well-being; to create novel fields of
study that hitherto might not have been
possible; to enhance decision making by
provisioning the power of data analytics;
to understand dynamics of human
behavior; and to affect commerce in a
globally integrated economy.
3.2. Opportunities and Challenges

Big data is clearly presenting us with
exciting opportunities and challenges in
data mining research.
First, data-driven science and discovery should try to discover action-oriented insights that lead to charting new
discoveries or impacts. Without understanding the nuances of one's data and
the domain, one can fall into the chasm
of simple and misleading correlation,
sometimes leading to false discovery and
insight. It is critical to fully understand
and appreciate the domain that one is
working in, and all observations and
insights to be appropriately structured in
that domain. It requires immersion of an
individual in a domain to conduct feature engineering, data exploration,
machine learning, and to inform system
design and database design, and to conduct what-if analysis. This is not to say
that a data scientist will be an expert in
every aspect. Rather a data scientist may
be an innovator in machine learning but
well-versed in system design or databases or visualization or quick prototyping. But the data scientist cannot be
divorced from the domain less they risk
the peril of failing. To lead data-driven
discoveries in an application domain
requires deep curiosity, capability to ask
big questions, and bring in diverse data
sources, in addition to the technological
and data science chops.
Second, algorithms are important,
but before we jump on a journey of
novel algorithms to tackle the four V's of
big data, it is important for the community to consider the advances done hitherto, conduct a thorough empirical survey of them and then identify the
potential bottlenecks, challenges and pitfalls of the existing state-of-the-art.

Moreover, it might be a bigger gain to
consider an additional data source while
considering a simpler algorithm in the
interest of answering questions about a
domain. It is about completing the picture, after all.
Third, any advances in scalable algorithms should be tied to the advances in
architecture, systems, and new database
constructs. We are witnessing a shift
towards technologies such as NoSQL
and Hadoop, given the schema-free
environment of the new data types and
the prevalence of unstructured data. It is
an opportunity for the algorithmic
researchers to collaborate with systems/
database researchers to integrate the
machine learning or data mining algorithms as part of the pipeline to naturally exploit the lower constructs of data
storage and computational fabric.
Fourth, a fundamental paradigm that
is present in front of us is data-driven
discovery. The data scientist must be the
curious outsider who can ask questions
of data, poke at the limitations placed on
the available data and identify additional
data that may enhance the performance
of the algorithms at a given task. The
hypothesis here is that there may be data
external to the data captured by a given
company, which may provide significant
value. For example, consider the problem of predicting readmission for a
patient on discharge. This problem of
reducing readmission may find significant value by considering lifestyle data,
which is outside of the patient's Electronic Medical Record (EMR).
We see these as some of the key
opportunities and challenges that are
specifically presented within the data
mining with big data research context.
4. Global Optimization
with Big Data

Another key area where big data offers
opportunity and challenges is global
optimization. Here we aim to optimize
decision variables over specific objectives. Meta-heuristic global search methods such as evolutionary algorithms
have been successfully applied to optimize a wide range of complex, largescale systems, ranging from engineering

design to reconstruction of biological
networks. Typically, optimization of such
complex systems needs to handle a variety of challenges as identified here [12].
4.1. Global Optimization
of Complex Systems

Complex systems often have a large
number of decision var iables and
involve a large number of objectives,
where the correlation between the
decision variables may be highly nonlinear and the objectives are often conflicting. Optimization problems with a
large number of decision variables,
known as large-scale optimization problems, are very challenging. For example,
the performance of most global search
algorithms will seriously degrade as the
number of decision variables increases,
especially when there is a complex correlational relationship between the
decision variables. Divide-andconquer
is a widely adopted strategy to deal
with large-scale optimization where the
key issue is to detect the correlational
relationships between the decision variables so that correlated relationships are
grouped into the same sub-population
and independent relationships grouped
into different sub-populations.
Over the past two decades, metaheuristics have been shown to be efficient in solving multi-objective optimization problems, where the objectives
are often conflicting with each other.
The main reason is that for a population-based search method, different individuals can capture different trade-off
relationships between the conflicting
objectives, e.g., in complex structural
design optimization [12]. As a result, it is
possible to achieve a representative subset of the whole Pareto-optimal solution
by performing one single run, in particular for bior tri-objective optimization
problems. Multi-objective optimization
meta-heuristics developed thus far can
largely be divided into three categories,
namely weighted aggregation based
methods [28], Pareto-dominance based
approaches [16] and performance indicator-based algorithms [5].
Unfortunately, none of these methods can work efficiently when the num-

ber of objectives becomes much higher
than three. This is mainly because the
number of total Pareto-optimal solutions becomes large and achieving a representative subset of them is no longer
tractable. For the weighted aggregation
approaches, it can become difficult to
create a limited number of weight combinations to represent the Pareto-optimal solutions of a very high-dimension.
For the Pareto-based approaches, most
solutions in a population of a limited
size are non-comparable. Thus, only few
individuals dominate others and selection pressure for better solutions is lost.
An additional difficulty is the increasingly large computational cost for performing the dominance relations when
the number of objectives increases. Performance indicator-based approaches
also suffer from high computational
complexity, e.g., in calculating the
hyper-volume.
The second main challenge associated with optimization of complex systems is the computationally expensive
processes of evaluating the quality of
solutions. For most complex optimization problems, either time-consuming
numerical simulations or expensive
experiments need to be conducted for
fitness evaluations. The prohibitively
high computational or experimental
costs make it intractable to apply global
population-based search algorithms to
such complex optimization problems.
One approach that has been shown to
be promising is the use of computationally efficient models, known as surrogates, to replace part of the expensive
fitness evaluations [29]. However, constructing sur rogates can become
extremely challenging for large-scale
problems with very limited data samples
that are expensive to collect.
Complex optimization problems are
often subject to large amounts of
uncertainties, such as varying environmental conditions, system degeneration,
or changing customer demand [29].
Two basic ideas can be adopted to
address the uncertainties in optimization. One is to find solutions that are
relatively insensitive to small changes in
decision variables or fitness functions,

November 2014 | IEEE Computational intelligence magazine

67

known as robust optimal solutions [29].
However, if the changes are large and
continuous, meta-heuristics for tracking
the moving optima will often be developed, which is known as dynamic optimization [42]. Different from the
robustness approach to handling uncertainties, dynamic optimization aims to
track the optimum whenever it
changes. Theoretically this sounds perfect, but practically it is not desired for
two reasons. First, tracking a moving
optimum is computationally intensive,
particularly if the fitness evaluations are
expensive. Second, a change in the
design or solution may be expensive
and frequent changes are not allowed in
many cases. To take these two factors
into account, a new approach to cope
with uncertainties, termed robustness
over time, has been suggested [30]. The
main idea is to reach a realistic trade-off
between finding a robust optimal solution and tracking the moving optimum.
That is, a design or solution will be
changed only if the solution currently
in use is no longer acceptable, and a
new optimal solution that changes
slowly over time, which is not necessarily the best solution in that time instant,
will be sought.
4.2. Big Data in Optimization

Meta-heuristic global optimization of
complex systems cannot be accomplished without data generated in
numerical simulations and physical
experiments. For example, design optimization of a racing car is extremely
challenging since it involves many subsystems such as front wing, rear wing,
chassis and tires. A huge number of
decision variables are involved, which
may seriously degrade the search performance of meta-heuristics. To alleviate
this difficulty, data generated by aerodynamic engineers in their daily work will
be very helpful to determine which
subsystem, or even as a step further
which part of the subsystem, is critical
for enhancing the aerodynamic and
drivability of a car. Analysis and mining
of such data is, however, a challenging
task, because the amount of data is huge,
and the data might be stored in different

68

forms and polluted with noise. In other
words, these data are fully characterized
by the four V's of big data. In addition, as
fitness evaluations of racing car designs
are highly time-consuming, surrogates
are indispensable in optimization of racing vehicles.
Another example is the computational reconstruction of biological gene
regulatory networks. Reconstruction of
gene regulatory networks can be seen as
a complex optimization problem, where
a large number of parameters and connectivity of the network need to be
determined. While meta-heuristic optimization algorithms have been shown to
be very promising, the gene expression
data for reconstruction is substantially
big data in nature [51]. Data available
from gene expression is increasing at an
exponential rate [59]. The volume of
data is ever increasing with developments in next generation sequence
techniques such as high-throughput
experiments. In addition, data from
experimental biology, such as microarray
data, is noisy, and gene expression experiments rarely have the same growth
conditions and thus produce heterogeneous data sets. Data variety is also significantly increased through the use of
deletion data, where a gene is deleted in
order to determine its regulatory targets.
Perturbation experiments are useful in
reconstruction of gene regulatory networks, which, however, are another
source of variety in biological data. Data
collected from different labs for the
same genes in the same biological network are often different.
It also becomes very important to
develop optimization algorithms that
are able to gain problem-specific
knowledge dur ing optimization.
Acquisition of problem-specific knowledge can help capture the problem
structure to perform more efficient
search. For largescale problems that
have a large number of objectives, such
knowledge can be used to guide the
search through the most promising
search space, and to specify preferences
over the objectives so that the search
will focus on the most important tradeoffs. Unfortunately, sometimes only

IEEE Computational intelligence magazine | November 2014

limited a-priori knowledge is available
for the problem to be solved. It is
therefore also interesting to discover
knowledge from similar optimization
problems or objectives that have been
previously solved [20]. In this case,
proper re-use of the knowledge can be
very challenging. The relationship
between the challenges in complex systems optimization and the nature of big
data is illustrated in Fig. 2.
4.3. Opportunities and Challenges

As discussed above, big data is widely
seen as essential for the success of the
design optimization of complex systems.
Much effort has been dedicated to the
use of data to enhance the performance
of meta-heuristic optimization algorithms for solving large-scale problems in
the presence of large amounts of uncertainties. It is believed that the boom in
big data research can create new opportunities as well as impose new challenges
to data driven optimization. Answering
the following questions can be central to
converting the challenges posed by big
data into opportunities.
First, how can we seamlessly integrate modern learning and optimization
techniques? Many advanced learning
techniques, such as semi-supervised
learning [63], incremental learning [15],
active learning [47] and deep learning
[10] have been developed over the past
decade. However, these techniques have
rarely been taken advantage of within
optimization with few exceptions, and
they are critical in acquiring domain
knowledge from a large amount of heterogeneous and noisy data. For optimization using meta-heuristics, such
knowledge is decisive in setting up a
flexible and compact problem representation, designing efficient search operators, constructing high-quality surrogates, and refining user preferences in
multi-objective optimization.
Second, how can we formulate the
optimization problem so that new
techniques developed in big data
research can be more efficiently leveraged? Traditional formulation of optimization problems consists of defining
objective functions, decision variables

Veracity

Volume
*
*
*
*

* High-Dimensional Decision
Space
* Large Number of Objectives
* Multiple Subsystems
Complex
System
Optimization
Variability
*
*
*
*

Noisy Fitness Evaluations
Robustness
Surrogate-Assisted Optimization
Multifidelity

Variety
* Mining Heterogeneous Data
* Knowledge Transfer Between
Problems
* Modeling Using Heterogeneous
Data

Tracking Moving Optimum
Robustness over Time
Online Knowledge Acquisition
Sustainability

Figure 2 Relationship between the challenges in complex engineering optimization and the nature of big data.

and constraints. This works perfectly for
small, well defined problems. Unfortunately, the formulation of complex
problems is itself an iterative learning
process. The new approaches to data
analysis in big data can be of interest in
simplifying the formation of complex
optimization problems. For example,
for surrogates to be used for rank prediction in population-based optimization, exact fitness prediction is less
important than figuring out the relative
order of the candidate designs. Might it
be also possible to find meta-decision
variables that might be more effective
in guiding the search process than
using the original decision variables?
Third, how do we visualize the
high-dimensional decision space as well
as the high-dimensional solution space
to understand the achieved solutions
and make a choice [27], [53]? How can
techniques developed in big data analytics be used in optimization?
Overcoming these challenges in a
big data framework will deliver significant advances to global optimization
over the coming years.
5. Industry, Government and
Society with Big Data

We have presented above some of the
technical challenges for research around
the disciplines impacted and challenged
by big data. In the end, we must also

focus on the delivery of benefit and outcomes within industry, business and government. Over the decades, many of the
technologies we have covered above, in
machine learning, data mining, and
global optimization, have found their
way into a variety of large-scale applications. We now ask what are the impacts
we see today in industry and government of big data, how is this affecting
and changing society, and how might
these changes affect our research across
all these disciplines?
In this section we present a perspective on data analytics from experiences
in industry and government. The discussion is purposefully presented as a point
of view of future practice rather than
presenting a scientifically rigorous argument. We identify areas where a focus
from research might deliver impact to
industry, government and society.
5.1. Decentralizing Big Data

It is useful to reflect that over the past
two decades we have witnessed an era
where society has seen the mass collection of personal data by commercial
interests and government. As users, we
have been enticed by significant benefits to hand our data over to these organizations, and these organizations now
house the big data that we have come
to understand as the concept or the
marketing term of the moment.

Google, Apple and Facebook,
together with many other Internet
companies that exist today, provide services ranging from the discovery of old
friends to the ability to share our
thoughts, personal details and daily
activities publicly. With much of our
e-mail, our diaries and calendars, our
photos and thoughts and personal
activities, now hosted by Google, for
example, there is tremendous opportunity to identify and deal with a wholeof-client view on a massive scale. Combine that with our web logs, updates on
our location and storage of our documents on Google Drive, and we start to
understand the massive scope of the
data collected about each of us, individually. These data can be used to better target the services advertised to us,
using an impressive variety of algorithmic technologies to deliver new
insights and knowledge.
Together, these crowdsourced data
stores entice us to deliver our personal
data to the data collectors in return for
the sophisticated services they offer. The
enticement is, of course, amazingly
attractive, evidenced by the sheer number of users in each of the growing
Internet ecosystems.
The customers that drive this data
collection by these Internet companies
are not the users of the services but are,
for example, commercial advertisers and

November 2014 | IEEE Computational intelligence magazine

69

government services. The data is also
made available to other organizations,
purposefully and/or inappropriately.
As data have been gradually collected
through centralized cloud services over
time, there is increasing need for broad
discussion and understanding of the privacy, security, and societal issues that
such collections of personal big data
present. We have, as a society, reduced
our focus on these issues and have come
to understand that the centralized store
of data is the only way in which we can
deliver these desirable services.
This concept of a centralized collection of personal and private data should
be challenged. The centralized model
primarily serves the interests of the
organizations collecting the data--
more so than the individuals. We are
seeing a growing interest and opportunity to instead turn this centralized
mode of data collection on its head,
and to serve the interests of the individuals first, and those of the organizations second. The emergence of, for
example, OwnClowd1 and SpiderOak,2
as personally hosted or encrypted
replacements to Google Drive and
DropBox, demonstrate this trend.
The slowly growing rediscovery of
the importance of privacy is leading to
a shakeup of how we store data. We
will see this leading to some governments introducing new governance
regimes for the Internet companies
over time, and the companies themselves beginning to improve upon and
market the importance of their protection of our data. We will also begin to
see a migration of data not being stored
centrally but being stored with the person about whom the data relates--the
appropriate data owner. This extreme
data distribution presents one of the
greatest challenges to data scientists in
the near future of big data.
We present below three big data
challenges that relate to this emerging
paradigm of extreme data distribution.
The two initial challenges are the scale
and the timeliness of our model build1

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Owncloud
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spideroak

2

70

ing. The main focus though is the challenge to society over the coming years
where data are migrated from centralized to such extremely distributed data
stores. This is one of the more significant challenges that will be presented
in the big data future, and one that has
major impact on how we think about
machine learning, data mining and
global optimization.
5.2. Scaled Down Targeted
Sub-Models

There has been considerable focus on
the need to scale up our traditional
machine learning algorithms to build
models over the whole of the population available--and to build them
quickly. Indeed, since the dawn of data
mining [45] a key focus has been to
scale algorithms. This is what we used
to identify as the distinguishing character istic between data mining (or
knowledge discovery from databases)
and the home disciplines of most of the
algorithms we used: machine learning
and statistics [56]. Our goal was to
make use of all the data available, to
avoid the need for sampling, and to
ensure we capture knowledge from the
whole population.
This goal remains with us today, as
we continue to be obsessed with and
able to collect data--masses of data--
and thereby introduce new businesses
and refine old ones. But of course we
have for the past decades talked about
big, large, huge, enormous, massive,
humongous, data. The current fad is to
refer to it as big data or massive data [40].
Irrespective, it is simply a lot of data.
In business and in government our
datasets today consist of anything from
100 observations of 20,000 variables, to
20 million observations of 1,000 variables, to 1 billion observations of
10,000 variables. Such large datasets
challenge any algorithm. While our
research focus is generally on the algorithms, the challenges presented to the
data collection, storage, management,
manipulation, cleansing, and transformation are often generally much bigger
(i.e., more time consuming) than presented by the actual model building.

IEEE Computational intelligence magazine | November 2014

Challenged with a massive dataset,
what is the task, in practice, of the data
scientist? In a future world, the learning
algorithms will trawl through the massive datasets for us--they will slice and
dice the data, and will identify anomalies, patterns, and behaviors. But how
will this be delivered?
A productive approach will be to
build on the successful early concept of
ensemble model building [55], but
taken to a new massive scale. In practice,
we are seeing the development of
approaches that massively partition our
datasets into many overlapping subsets,
representing many different subspaces,
often identifying behavioral archetypes.
Within these subspaces we can more
accurately understand and model the
multiple behaviors exhibited by the
entities of interest. The idea is not new
[57] but has received scant attention
over the years until now when we are
realizing the need to slice and dice big
data in sensible ways to uncover these
multitudes of behavioral patterns. Today
in industry and gover nment this
approach is delivering new models that
are demonstrating surprisingly good
results based on ensembles of thousands
of smaller very different local models.
The challenge here is how to identify
the behavioral subspaces within which
we build our models. Instead of building
a scaled predictive model over big data
we build a community of thousands of
micro models, which as an ensemble
operate over the whole population. This
is done by understanding and dealing
with the nuances and idiosyncrasies of
the different sub-populations. It is within
the much smaller sub-populations where
the predictive models, for example, are
built. The final model is then the ensemble of individual models applied to each
new observation.
A recent successful implementation
of this approach, deployed in practice,
has analyzed over 2 million observations
of 1000 variables to identify 20,000 such
behavioral subspaces. The subspaces are
created using a combination of cluster
analysis and decision tree induction, and
each subspace is described symbolically,
each identifying and representing new

concepts. The subspaces can overlap--
individual observations can belong to
multiple subspaces (i.e., a single observation may exhibit multiple behaviors).
For each of the 20,000 subspaces, micro
predictive models can be built, and by
then combining these into an ensemble--using global optimization of multiple complex objective functions--we
deliver an empirically effective global
model, deployed, for example, to risk
score the whole tax paying population
of Australia, as they interact online to
lodge their tax returns.
We can (and no doubt will) continue to explore new computational
paradigms like in-database analytics to
massively scale machine learning and
statistical algorithms to big data. But the
big game will be in identifying and
modeling the multiple facets of the
variety of behaviors we all individually
exhibit, and share with sizeable subpopulations, over which the modeling
itself will be undertaken.
5.3. Right Time, Real Time,
Online Analytics

The traditional data miner, in practice,
has generally been involved in batchoriented model building, using machine
learning and statistical algorithms. From
our massive store of historical data we
use algorithms such as logistic regression, decision tree induction, random
forests, neural networks, and support
vector machines. Once we have built
our model(s) we then proceed to deploy
the models. In the business context we
migrate our models into production.
The models then run on new transactions as they arrive, perhaps scoring each
transaction and then deciding on a treatment for that transaction--that is, based
on the score, how should the transaction
be processed by our systems?
The process is typical of how data
mining is delivered in many large organizations today, including government,
financial institutions, insurance companies, health providers, marketing, and so
on. In the Australian Taxation Office, for
example, every day a suite of data mining models risk score every transaction
(tax return) received. The Australian

Immigration Department [4], as another
example, has developed a risk model
that assesses all passengers when they
check-in for their international flight to
Australia (known as Advance Passenger
Processing) using data mining models.
Such examples abound through industry
and government.
Today's agile context now requires
more than this. The larger and older
organizations, world wide, have tended
to be much less agile in their ability to
respond to the rapid changes delivered
through the Internet and our data-rich
world. Organizations no longer have the
luxury of spending a few months building models for scoring transactions in
batch mode. We need to be able to assess
each transaction as the transaction happens, and to dynamically learn as the
model interacts with the massive volumes of transactions that we are faced
with as they occur. We need to build
models in realtime to respond in real
time and that learn and change their
behavior in real-time.
Research in incremental learning is
certainly not new. Incremental learning
[15], [46], just-in-time or any-time
learning [49], and data stream mining
[21] have all addressed similar issues in
different ways over the past decades.
There is now increasing opportunity to
capitalize on the approach. The question
continues as to how we can maintain
and improve our knowledge store over
time, and work to forget old, possibly
incorrect, knowledge?
The development of dynamic, agile
learners working in real-time--that is,
as they interact with the real world--
remain quite a challenge and will
remain a central challenge for our big
data world.
5.4. Extreme Data Distribution:
Privacy and Ownership

Having considered two intermediate
challenges around big data, we now
consider a game-changing challenge.
The future holds for us the prospect of
individuals regaining control of their
data from the hands of the now common centralized massive stores. We
expect to see this as an orderly evolution

of our understanding of what is best for
society as we progress and govern our
civil society in this age of big data collection and surveillance and of its consequent serious risk to privacy.
Data ownership has become a challenging issue in our data rich world.
Data collectors in the corporate and
government spheres are learning to efficiently collect increasingly larger holdings of big data. However, with the help
of civil libertarians, philosophers and
whistle blowers, society is gradually
realizing the need for better governance
over the collection and use of data.
Recent events like Wikileaks 3 and
Edward Snowden 4 help to raise the
level of discussion that is providing
insight into the dangers of aggregating
data centrally--with little regard about
who owns the data.
We are well-aware of the dangers of
single points of failure--relying on our
data held centrally, as massive datasets,
stored securely, and to be used by the
data collectors only for the benefit of
our society, and the individuals of that
society. Yet, a single point of failure will
mean that just one flaw or one breach
can lead to devastating consequences on
a massive scale. And with ever more
sophisticated methods of attack, it is
happening more frequently. Even without sophistication, Snowden has demonstrated that simply having all the data
stored in one location increases the risks
significantly, to the detriment of industry, governments, and society as a whole.
After identifying risks. we often
work towards strategies to mitigate those
risks. An obvious strategy is to recoil
from the inherently insecure centralization of the collection of data. Personal
data need to move back to the individuals to whom the data belongs. We can
and should increasingly collect and
retain such data ourselves, under our
control, as individuals, reducing the
overall societal risk.
The services that are so attractive
and that we have come to rely upon,
the services provided by Google, Apple,
3

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikileaks
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward Snowden

4

November 2014 | IEEE Computational intelligence magazine

71

Facebook, and many other Internet ecosystems, must still be delivered. The corporations can retain their ability to profit
from the data, while the data itself is
retained by the data owners. Under this
future scenario, instead of centralizing all
the computation, we can bring the
computation to intelligent agents running on our own personal devices and
communicating with the service providers. Business models can still be profitable and users can regain their privacy.
Our personal data will be locked
behind encryption technology, and the
individuals will hold the key to unlock
the data as they wish. The data will be
served to our portable smart devices
where it is decrypted and provides the
services (mail, photos, music, instant
messaging, shopping, search, web logs,
etc.) we require. The data will be hosted
in these personal encrypted clouds, running on mesh-network connected commodity smart devices. We see the beginnings of this change happening now
with projects like the Freedom Box,5
OwnCloud, and the IndieWeb, and the
widespread and massive adoption of
powerful smartphones!
This view of distributed massive
data brings with it the challenge to
develop technology and algorithms that
work over an extreme data distribution.
How can we distribute the computation over this extreme level of data distribution and still build models that
learn in a big data context?
The challenge of extreme distributed big data and learning is one that
will quickly grow over the next few
years. It will require quite a different
approach to the development of
machine learning, data mining and
global optimization. Compare this
approach to how we might view society functioning through an ensemble of
humans--we are each personally a
store of a massive amount of data and
we share and learn from and use that
data as we interact with the world and
with other humans. So must the learning algorithms of the future.

5

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FreedomBox

72

5.5. Opportunities and Challenges

Identifying key challenges of big data
leads one to question how the future of
data collection might evolve over the
coming years. As the pendulum reaches
the limit of centralized massive data collection, in time, and possibly sooner than
we might expect, we will see the pendulum begin to swing back. It must
swing back to a scenario where we
restore data to the ownership and control of the individuals about whom the
data relates. The data will be extremely
distributed, with individual records distributed far and wide, just as the data
owners are distributed far and wide
across our planet.
With an extreme data distribution
we will be challenged to provide the
services we have come to expect with
massive centralized data storage. Those
challenges are surely not insurmountable, but will take considerable research,
innovation, and software development
to deliver.
The first challenge presented then
becomes one of appropriately partitioning big data (eventually massive extreme
distributed data), to identify behavioral
groups within which we learn, and to
even model and learn at the individual
level. The second challenge is to refocus
again on delivering learning algorithms
that self-learn (or self-modify) in realtime, or at least at the right time, and to
do this online. Finally, how do we
deliver this in the context of extreme
data distribution where the database
records are now distributed far and wide
and are privacy protected, and how we
might deliver learning agents that look
after the interests of their "owner".
6. Wrap Up

From the data analytics perspectives we
have presented here, there are many new
opportunities and challenges brought by
big data. Some of these are not necessarily new, but are issues that have not
received the attention that they deserve.
Here we recall some of the important/
interesting issues:
 Data size: On one hand, we develop "one-pass learning" algorithms
that require only one scan of the

IEEE Computational intelligence magazine | November 2014

data with limited storage irrelevant
to data size; on the other hand, we
try to identify smaller partitions of
the really valuable data from the
original big data.
 Data variety: Data presents itself in
varied forms for a given concept. It
is presenting a new notion to learning systems and computational
intelligence algorithm for classification, where the feature vector is
multi-modal, with structured and
unstructured text, and still the
notion is to classify one concept
from another. How do we create a
feature vector, and then a learning
algor ithm with an appropr iate
objective function to learn from
such varied data?
 Data trust: While data is rapidly
and increasingly available, it is also
important to consider the data
source and if the data can be trusted.
More data is not necessarily correct
data, and more data is not necessarily
valuable data. A keen filter for the
data is a key.
 Distributed existence: Owners of
different parts of the data might warrant different access rights. We must
aim to leverage data sources without
access to the whole data, and exploit
them without transporting the data.
We will need to pay attention to the
fact that different sources may come
with different label quality, there may
be serious noise in the data due to
crowd-sourcing, and the i.i.d. assumption may not hold across the sources.
 Extreme distribution: Taking this
idea even further, the unit-level data
may be what we see as the level of
data distribution, as we deal with
issues of privacy and security. New
approaches to modeling big data will
be required to work with extreme
distributed data.
 Diverse demands: People may
have diverse demands whereas the
high cost of big data processing may
disable construction of a separate
model for each demand. Can we
build one model to satisfy the various demands? We also need to note
that, with big data, it is possible to

find supporting evidence to any
argument we want; then, how to
judge/evaluate our "findings"?
 Sub-Models: Diverse demands
might also relate to diversity of the
behaviors that we are modeling
within our application domains.
Rather than one single model to
cover it all, the model will consist of
ensembles of a large number of
smaller models that together deliver
better understandings and predictions
than the single, complex model.
 Intuition importance: Data is
going to power novel discoveries and
action-oriented business insights. It is
important to still attach intuition,
curiosity and domain knowledge
without which one may become
myopic and fall in the chasm of
"correlation is enough". Computational intelligence should be tied
with human intuition.
 Rapid model: As the world continues to "speed up", decisions need to
be made more quickly because
fraudsters can more quickly find new
methods in an agile environment,
model building must become more
agile and real-time.
 Big optimization: Global optimization algorithms such as meta-heuristics have achieved great success in
academic research, but have rarely
been employed in industry. One
major obstacle is the huge computational cost required for evaluating the
quality of candidate designs of complex engineering systems. The emerging big data analytic technologies will
remove the obstacle to a certain
degree by reusing knowledge extracted from the huge amount of highdimensional, heterogeneous and noisy
data. Such knowledge can also be
acquired with new visualization techniques. Big data driven optimization
will also play a key role in reconstruction of large-scale biological systems.
 Complex optimization: Definition of decision variables, setup of
the objectives and articulation of the
constraints are three main steps in
formulating optimization problems
before solving them. For optimiza-

tion of complex systems, formulation
of the optimization problem itself
becomes a complex optimization
problem. The big data approach
might provide us new insights and
methodologies for formulating optimization problems, thus leading to a
more efficient solution.
In closing the discussion, we emphasize that the opportunities and challenges brought by big data are very
broad and diverse, and it is clear that no
single technique can meet all demands.
In this sense, big data also brings a
chance of "big combination" of techniques and of research.
Acknowledgments

The authors want to thank the editor and
anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and suggestions. This article presents a consolidation of some of the
presentations and discussion of the panel
"Big Data: Real Challenges and Status"
hosted at IDEAL 2013; the very positive
reflections from the audience for the
panel motivated the writing of this article.
The authors thank Hui Xiong, Kai
Yu, Xin Yao and other participants for
comments and discussion.
References

[1] J. Abello, P. M. Pardalos, and M. G. Resende, Handbook of Massive Data Sets (Massive Computing). vol. 4,
New York: Springer, 2002.
[2] C. C. Aggarwal and P. S. Yu, Eds., Privacy-Preserving
Data Mining: Models and Algorithms. New York: Springer,
2008.
[3] C. C. Aggarwal, Data Streams: Models and Algorithms.
vol. 31, New York: Springer, 2007.
[4] (2013). Australian Dept. Immigration. Fact sheet 70--
Managing the border Internet. [Online]. Available: http://
www.immi.gov.au/media/factsheets/70border.htm
[5] J. Bader and E. Zitzler, "HypE: An algorithm for fast
hypervolume-based manyobjective optimization," Evol.
Comput., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 45-76, 2011.
[6] P. Baldi and P. J. Sadowski, "Understanding dropout," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
26. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013, pp. 2814-2822.
[7] M. Banko and E. Brill, "Scaling to very very large
corpora for natural language disambiguation," in Proc.
39th Annu. Meeting Association Computational Linguistics,
Toulouse, France, 2001, pp. 26-33.
[8] A.-L. Barabasi, Linked: The New Science of Networks.
New York: Basic Books, 2002.
[9] M. Basu and T. K. Ho, Data Complexity in Pattern Recognition. London, U.K.: Springer, 2006.
[10] Y. Bengio, "Learning deep architectures for AI,"
Foundations Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1-127,
2009.
[11] E. Brynjolfsson, L. Hitt, and H. Kim. (2011).
Strength in numbers: How does data-driven decision
making affect firm performance. [Online]. Available:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1819486
[12] T. Chai, Y. Jin, and S. Bernhard, "Evolutionary
complex engineering optimization: Opportunities and

challenges," IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 8, no. 3, pp.
12-15, 2013.
[13] N. V. Chawla, "Data mining for imbalanced datasets: An overview," in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
Handbook, O. Maimon and L. Rokach, Eds. New York:
Springer, 2005, pp. 853-867.
[14] N. V. Chawla, Learning on Extremes-Size and Imbalance-of Data. Tampa, FL: Univ. South Florida, 2002.
[15] Q. Da, Y. Yu, and Z.-H. Zhou, "Learning with augmented class by exploiting unlabeled data," in Proc. 28th
AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence, Quebec City, QC, Canada, 2014.
[16] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, "A
fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGAII," IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182-197,
2002.
[17] T. G. Dietterich, "Approximate statistical tests for
comparing supervised classification learning algorithms,"
Neural Comput., vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 1895-1923, 1998.
[18] D. Easley and J. Kleinberg, Networks, Crowds, and
Markets. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010.
[19] A. Farhangfar, L. Kurgan, and J. Dy, "Impact of
imputation of missing values on classification error for
discrete data," Pattern Recognit., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3692-
3705, 2008.
[20] L. Feng, Y.-S. Ong, I. Tsang, and A.-H. Tan, "An
evolutionary search paradigm that learns with past experiences," in Proc. IEEE Congr. Evolutionary Computation,
Brisbane QLD, Australia, 2012, pp. 1-8.
[21] M. M. Gaber, A. Zaslavsky, and S. Krishnaswamy,
"Mining data streams: A review," ACM SIGMOD Record,
vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 18-26, 2005.
[22] W. Gao, R. Jin, S. Zhu, and Z.-H. Zhou, "Onepass AUC optimization," in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Machine
Learning, Atlanta, GA, 2013, pp. 906-914.
[23] W. Gao and Z.-H. Zhou, "Dropout rademacher complexity of deep neural networks," CORR
abs/1402.3811, 2014.
[24] J. A. Hanley and B. J. McNeil, "A method of comparing the areas under receiver operating characteristic
curves derived from the same cases," Radiology, vol. 148,
no. 3, pp. 839-843, 1983.
[25] G. E. Hinton, P. Dayan, B. J. Frey, and R. M. Neal,
"The "wake-sleep" algorithm for unsupervised neural networks," Science, vol. 268, no. 5214, pp. 1158-1161, 1995.
[26] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, "Reducing
the dimensionality of data with neural networks," Science,
vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504-507, 2006.
[27] H. Ishibuchi, M. Yamane, N. Akedo, and Y. Nojima, "Many-objective and many-variable test problems
for visual examination of multiobjective search," in Proc.
IEEE Congr. Evolutionary Computation, Cancun, QROO,
2013, pp. 1491-1498.
[28] H. Ishibuchi and T. Murata, "Multi-objective genetic local search algorithm," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Evolutionary Computation, Nagoya, Japan, 1996, pp. 119-124.
[29] Y. Jin and J. Branke, "Evolutionary optimization in
uncertain environments--A survey," IEEE Trans. Evol.
Comput., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 303-317, 2005.
[30] Y. Jin, K. Tang, X. Yu, B. Sendhoff, and X. Yao,
"A framework for finding robust optimal solutions over
time," Memetic Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 3-18, 2013.
[31] T. Joachims, "Making large-scale SVM training
practical," in Advances in Kernel Methods, B. SchOlkopf, C.
J. C. Burges, and A. J. Smola, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1999, pp. 169-184.
[32] Y. LeCun and Y. Bengio, "Convolutional networks
for images, speech, and time series," in The Handbook of
Brain Theory and Neural Networks, M. A. Arbib, Ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
[33] J. Leskovec, A. Krause, C. Guestrin, C. Faloutsos,
J. VanBriesen, and N. Glance, "Cost-effective outbreak
detection in networks," in Proc. 13th ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowledge Discovery Data Mining, 2007, pp.
420-429.
[34] M. Li, W. Wang, and Z.-H. Zhou, "Exploiting remote learners in internet environment with agents," Sci.
China: Inform. Sci., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 47-76, 2010.
[35] N. Li, I. W. Tsang, and Z.-H. Zhou, "Efficient optimization of performance measures by classifier adaptation," IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 35, no.
6, pp. 1370-1382, 2013.

November 2014 | IEEE Computational intelligence magazine

73

[36] R. N. Lichtenwalter, J. T. Lussier, and N. V. Chawla,
"New perspectives and methods in link prediction," in
Proc. 16th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowledge Discovery
Data Mining, 2010, pp. 243-252.
[37] V. Mayer-SchOnberger and K. Cukier, Big Data: A
Revolution That Transforms How We Work, Live, and Think.
Boston, MA: Houghton Miff lin Harcourt, 2012. (Chinese translated version by Y. Sheng and T. Zhou, Zhejiang Renmin Press).
[38] M. Mohri and A. Rostamizadeh, "Stability bounds
for stationary {-mixing and b-mixing processes," J.
Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 11, pp. 789-814, 2010.
[39] J. G. Moreno-Torres, T. Raeder, R. Alaiz-Rodriguez, N. V. Chawla, and F. Herrera, "A unifying view on
dataset shift in classification," Pattern Recognit., vol. 45,
no. 1, pp. 521-530, 2012.
[40] National Research Council, Frontiers in Massive Data Analysis. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2013.
[41] M. E. Newman, "The structure and function of complex
networks," SIAM Rev., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 167-256, 2003.
[42] T. T. Nguyen, S. Yang, and J. Branke, "Evolutionary
dynamic optimization: A survey of the state of the art,"
Swarm Evol. Comput., vol. 6, pp. 1-24, Oct. 2012.
[43] B.-H. Park and H. Kargupta, "Distributed data mining: Algorithms, systems, and applications," in The Handbook of Data Mining, N. Ye, Ed. Mahwah, New Jersey, US:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002, pp. 341-358.
[44] J. Pearl, Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2000.
[45] G. Piatetsky-Shapiro and W. Frawley, Eds., Proceedings of IJCAI89 Workshop on Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Detroit, MI: AAAI, 1989.
[46] J. C. Schlimmer and D. Fisher, "A case study of
incremental concept induction," in Proc. 5th Nat. Conf.
Artificial Intelligence, Philadelphia, PA, 1986, pp. 496-501.

[47] B. Settles. (2009). Active learning literature survey.
Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. Wisconsin at Madison. Wisconsin, WI. Tech. Rep. 1648. [Online]. Available: http://
pages.cs.wisc.edu/~bsettles/pub/settles.activelearning.pdf
[48] J. A. Silva, E. R. Faria, R. C. Barros, E. R. Hruschka, A. C. de Carvalho, and J. Gama, "Data stream
clustering: A survey," ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
vol. 46, no. 1, p. 13, 2013.
[49] P. Smyth, "Recent advances in knowledge discovery
and data mining (invited talk)," in Proc. 14th Nat. Conf.
Artificial Intelligence, Providence, RI, 1997.
[50] A. Srivastava, E.-H. Han, V. Kumar, and V. Singh,
Parallel Formulations of Decision-Tree Classification Algorithms. New York: Springer, 2002.
[51] S. A. Thomas and Y. Jin, "Reconstructing biological
gene regulatory networks: Where optimization meets big
data," Evol. Intell., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 29-47, 2013.
[52] S. Wager, S. Wang, and P. Liang, "Dropout training
as adaptive regularization," in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2013, pp. 351-359.
[53] D. Walker, R. Everson, and J. E. Fieldsend, "Visualising mutually non-dominating solution sets in manyobjective optimisation," IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol.
17, no. 2, pp. 165-184, 2013.
[54] D. J. Watts, Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age.
New York: W. W. Norton, 2004.
[55] G. J. Williams, "Combining decision trees: Initial
results from the MIL algorithm," in Artificial Intelligence
Developments and Applications, J. S. Gero and R. B. Stanton, Eds. North Holland, The Netherlands: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1988, pp. 273-289.
[56] G. J. Williams and Z. Huang, "A case study in
knowledge acquisition for insurance risk assessment using a KDD methodology," in Proc. Pacific Rim Knowledge

Acquisition Workshop, P. Compton, R. Mizoguchi, H.
Motoda, and T. Menzies, Eds., Sydney, Australia, 1996,
pp. 117-129.
[57] G. J. Williams and Z. Huang, "Mining the knowledge mine: The hot spots methodology for mining large,
real world databases," in Advanced Topics in Artificial Intelligence, A. Sattar, Ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1997,
pp. 340-348.
[58] X. Wu and X. Zhu, "Mining with noise knowledge:
Error-aware data mining," IEEE Trans. Syst., Man Cybern. A, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 917-932, 2008.
[59] M. Xiao, L. Zhang, B. He, J. Xie, and W. Zhang, "A
parallel algorithm of constructing gene regulatory networks," in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Optimization Systems Biology, D.-Z. Du and X.-S. Zhang, Eds., Zhangjiajie, China,
2009, pp. 184-188.
[60] M. J. Zaki and C.-T. Ho, Eds., Large-Scale Parallel
Data Mining. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2000.
[61] D. Zhou, J. C. Platt, S. Basu, and Y. Mao, "Learning from the wisdom of crowds by minimax entropy,"
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25, P.
Bartlett, F. C. N. Pereira, C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou,
and K. Q. Weinberger, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2012.
[62] Z.-H. Zhou, "Rule extraction: Using neural networks or for neural networks?" J. Comput. Sci. Technol.,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 249-253, 2004.
[63] X. Zhu, (2006). Semi-supervised learning literature
survey. Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. Wisconsin at Madison. Madison, WI, Tech. Rep. 1530. [Online]. Available:
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~jerryzhu/pub/sslsurvey.pdf



From Imagination to Market
"IEEE Standards Online
gives us access to
up-to-date standards
with minimal effort."
- Leading Technology Company

IEEE Standards Online
Your Direct Connection to IEEE Standards
Continuous access to the comprehensive and growing collection
of IEEE Standards.
Access tomorrow's draft standards first and get a jump on
the competition
Find a standard quickly with fast and comprehensive search
and retrieval features
Immediate updates and automatic email alerts
Substantial savings over purchasing individually

Free Trial!
Experience IEEE -
request a trial for your company.

www.ieee.org/standardsonline

74

IEEE Computational intelligence magazine | November 2014

